section-3-chapter-12-install-mblock-on-your-computer.md, before:

# Section 3

---

## Chapter 13: Install mBlock on your computer

---

In this chapter you will learn about:

* How to download mBlock
* How to install mBlock on your computer
* How to start mBlock for the first time

---

Before we continue with downloading mBlocks and starting with their programming component of this course, I just want to take up-let me just talk about the mBot.  
The mBot that you get out of the box once you assemble it is going to look like this. It will have two motors and then inside the plastic package, you've got a customized version of the Arduino Uno that contains the ports that you can see here that you connect to external peripherals.  
Your mBot will have the range finder sensor and the line following sensor attached to the bottom. The mBot that I've got here also has an additional lithium ion battery that doesn't come with the package. Normally, what you probably have attached to your mBot is a power pack or battery pack that contains four double AA batteries and everything that I will talk about in the remainder, of course works just fine, whichever battery option you use.  
I preferred myself to go with a lithium ion battery because it is lighter and also has a larger capacity than the four double AA batteries, so, it helps me record these videos without having to change batteries. Other than that, the mBot that you get out of the box will look like this, and once you have it assembled, we can go forward.  
One other thing about the relation between the mBot and the Arduino Uno -- I'm not sure if you are familiar with the Arduino Uno, but I'd like to spend a few seconds talking about this really quickly. The Arduino Uno is based around an ATmega 328p microcontroler and you can consider it as the basis or the brain of the mBot.  
Inside the mBot, we've got a customized version of this little machine, this little board with the exact same microcontroller, the exact same chip here. You can see that the USB connector between the Arduino Uno and the mBot is the same. So the same cable can be connected on both microcontrollers.  
I'm talking about this because apart from the connector being the same of course, in order to program the Arduino, we will eventually be using the Arduino IDE, the exact same software that you can use to independently program the Arduino.  
MBlock, once you download it, internally it contains a full blown Arduino IDE inside. I'm going to point this out when we upload our first program onto the mBot. Sometimes, because I'm used to talking so much about sketches, instead of saying, "We'll now upload a program to the mBot" I might say, "We will now upload a sketch to the mBot" and sometimes I do that because this is a terminology used with the Arduino.  
Arduino programs are referred to as 'sketches' just to amplify the prototyping nature of the platform. The fact that every program that you create is just a newer version of an older program, like an updated version of an older program, and we treat it as a sketch that very soon will be made obsolete by a newer version.  
With all that said, let's have a look at mBlock. The place to go and download your mBlock development environment is at mBlock.cc. You go to mBlock.cc and depending on the computer that you have and your operating system, you download either the Windows version or the Mac version.  
Once you complete the download of one or the other version, you will end up with an archived file that inside it contains the mBlock application. Use whichever tool you're familiar with to expand on the zip file and what you end up with is the mBlock application. To use it, you simply double click on it and the application will start. It looks like this.  
The Mac version looks identical to the Windows version, so, I'm going to switch to Windows now and do the rest of this presentation on the Windows version. But just be aware that everything that I do on the Windows version of mBlock's in the exact same way, everything is organized to be identical between the Mac and Windows. So if you're on a Mac, you can just follow along without any changes at all.  
Let's move along and start playing with mBlock on Windows.

Commit message:

Creates assets/2017-03-22_14-59-14.png
Auto commit by GitBook Editor

section-3-chapter-12-install-mblock-on-your-computer.md, after:

# Section 3

---

## Chapter 13: Install mBlock on your computer

---

In this chapter you will learn about:

* How to download mBlock
* How to install mBlock on your computer
* How to start mBlock for the first time

---

The program that you will use from this point onwards for programming your mBot is called mBlock. This is free software that you can download for Windows, Mac OS or Linux computer from www.mblock.cc/download.

Go there now and start the download process for your computer and operating system.![](/assets/2017-03-22_14-40-54.png)\[Image 3.13.1: Download mBlock from www.mblock.cc/download\]

Once the download completes, install it on your computer as you do with any other software. 

  
When you complete the installation, start mBlock! Whether you are using a Windows, Mac or Linux computer, mBlock will look the same.![](/assets/2017-03-22_14-59-14.png)\[Image 3.13.2: Starting the mBlock application for the first time\]

When mBlock starts, it should like like the screenshot in Image 3.13.2. Let's have a quick look at the components that make up this view of mBlock. In the next chapter you will go deeper into mBlock and learn to use everything you see in Image 3.13.2.

Item 1 is the stage. In the stage, any sprite you use, in this example it's a Panda, will move around as instructed by its program. In this area your program can also print out messages; it is a way for your program to "speak" to you. For example, if your program contains an instruction that causes the sprite to move 5 steps to the right, then in the playground the sprite will do just that. The stage can contain multiple sprites and other graphical elements that you interact with programmatically.

Item 2 is where the sprite list appears. At the moment, there is only the Panda sprite. You can replace it with any other image you like, as long as you have a compatible image file. You can use a photo of yourself if you like! In the Sprite list area you can add, remove and edit sprites.

Item 3 is the Blocks Palette. This is where any programming graphical block appear. In this view, you can see three tabs, Scripts, Costumes and Sounds, that give you access to different functions. We will be using blocks in the Scripts tab. In the Scripts tab, you can see categories of blocks, like Motion, Looks, Sound etc. You will learn about many of these blocks in the next chapter. 

In the Blocks Palette, the Costumes tab gives you access to the sprite editor. You can use the editor to change how a sprite looks, or even to create new sprites. And in the Sounds tab, you can design sounds and assign them to sprite activities. For example, you can draw a sprite that looks like a robot in the Costumes tab, and then use the Sound editor to create appropriate sounds so that when your robot moves it sounds like one of the Transformer robots walking.

Item 4 is the scripts area. This is where you will start assembling your programs in the next chapter. You do that by dragging blocks from the blocks palette into the scripts area, and connecting them with other blocks.

Arduino programs are referred to as 'sketches' just to amplify the prototyping nature of the platform. The fact that every program that you create is just a newer version of an older program, like an updated version of an older program, and we treat it as a sketch that very soon will be replaced by a newer version.  


Great work! Now that you are familiar with mBlock, go on to the next chapter where you will learn about the most important programming blocks and create your first programs.
